Chicago in 1854 had a major problem, and it wasn’t the labor strikes, or riots. It was constant outbreaks of cholera. There were 1421 people laid low by cholera, 2 from diarrhea, and 242 from dysentery; both of which could have easily been Cholera. 9% of the City population gone, in a matter of weeks. No one knew what caused it, but it had one common trend: poor sanitation, and impure drinking water. Chicago needed fresh drinking water, and a sanitation system. So the city offered the position of Engineer for the Chicago Board of Sewerage Commission to one Ellis S. Chesbrough.

Ellis S. Chesbrough was born in Baltimore, Maryland in 1813. He started his career in 1826, when he was sent to work on the Baltimore-Ohio Railroad as a Chainman. While out on the rails he started to pick up engineering. In 1846, he left railroad work and went into the field he’d ultimately make his mark in: civic engineering. For the next nine years he worked on the Boston Water system, and Boston Harbor. Then Chicago came calling.

In order to take care of Chicago’s Filth, Chesbrough needed to install a sewer. One issue was that Chicago was built on flat swamp land. So the options were:

1. Move Chicago’s Downtown Area, or

2. Raise Chicago.

The city went for the second option; with the help of George Pullman’s Jackscrews it got done.  Crews of men working simultaneously to lay new foundation, install the new plumbing, and raise the buildings with people still occupying the buildings. With this method, it got done within a decade of starting.

All that sewage needed to go somewhere, and that somewhere was the Chicago river; which flowed into Lake Michigan which is where Chicago got it’s fresh drinking water. Which, unless water intakes were put further out, they would still be drinking contaminated water. So, Project 2: Create water inlets far away from the city’s own filth. Initially set to be two miles out. However, with the addition of 1 million people worth of excrement that came later as part of the union stock yards, the intake cribs needed to be extended 4 miles out.

However, the City’s water was Still getting polluted. So The City sanitation department enacted the third, and final project, the reversal of the Chicago river. This was done so that instead of the sewage flowing into Chicago’s principle water supply, it would flow into the Mississippi river, and into the Gulf of Mexico. This was accomplished by digging multiple channels around the Chicago river, and one large one connecting to the Des Planes river.

Overall, Chesbrough’s life lead to several major projects in Chicago that Chicago still uses today, and without which Chicago could not have thrived, or even become half the city that it is today.Page Break

Works Cited

"Ellis Sylvester Chesbrough." American Society of Civil Engineers. American Society of Civil Engineers, n.d. Web. 15 Feb. 2016. <http://www.asce.org/templates/person-bio-detail.aspx?id=9916>.

"Epidemics." Encyclopedia of Chicago. Encyclopedia of Chicago, n.d. Web. 15 Feb. 2016. <http://www.encyclopedia.chicagohistory.org/pages/432.html>.

"Reversal of Fortune." 99% Invisible. Radiotopia, 8 Aug. 2013. Web. 5 Feb. 2016. <http://99percentinvisible.org/episode/episode-86-reversal-of-fortune/>.

"Rivers in Reverse." Compass. N.p., n.d. Web. 15 Feb. 2016. <http://midwestcompass.org/projects/southwest-corridor-northwest-passage/chicago/rivers-in-reverse/>.

